The Affenpinscher, also known as the Monkey Terrier, is a small-sized terrier-like toy Pinscher breed of dog that originated in Germany. Originally developed as a mouser, the Affenpinscher's distinctive appearance and charming personality has gained popularity as a companion among dog lovers worldwide.The American Kennel Club (AKC) describes the Affenpinscher as loyal, curious, and famously amusing. The breeds personality is described as almost-human, and a fearless comedian.

History
The breed is German in origin and dates back to the seventeenth century. The name "Affenpinscher" is derived from the German affe (ape, monkey). When translated in English, the name means Monkey Terrier, supposedly so called because the breed's little face looks more than a little simian.Dogs of the Affenpinscher type have been known since about 1600. There were originally thought to be two sizes, the larger size is now extinct. The larger size was approximately 30 to 33 centimetres (12 to 13 in), and came in colors of grey, fawn, black, tan, and red. White feet and chests were also common. The breed was created to be a ratter in homes, working to remove rodents from kitchens, and also granaries and stables. Early breeders crossed the various schnauzers and pinschers with the goal to create a mouser who also was a good companion dog.  Some of the breeds that may have been included to produce the Affenpinscher are pugs, German pinschers, schnauzers and silky pinschers.The breed predates and is ancestral to the Griffon Bruxellois (Brussels Griffon) and Miniature Schnauzer which was thought to be from affenpinschers crossed with standard schnauzers in addition to other breeds. The breed was recognized by the AKC in 1935 and the FCI in 1955.
Banana Joe V Tani Kazari, a.k.a. Joe, a five-year-old Affenpinscher, was named Best in Show at the 2013 Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in New York City. This win is notable since it was the first time this breed won Westminster's Best in Show.

Description
Appearance
An Affenpinscher generally weighs three to six kilograms (7–13 lb) and stands 23 to 30 centimetres (9 to 12 in) tall at the withers. It has a harsh rough coat when it is not clippered, but if clippered it can be softer and fluffier. It has a notable monkey-like expression (affe is German for monkey). Its coat is shaggier over the head and shoulders forming a mane, with a shorter coat over the back and hind quarters. It is harsh and wiry in texture when properly maintained. The FCI and KC breed standards specifies that the coat must be black, but the AKC also allows grey, silver, red, black and tan, and belge (a mixture of red, brown, black and white hairs); other clubs have their own lists of acceptable colors, with black being the preference. The tail is sometimes docked, but in places like Europe, it is illegal.

Temperament
Affenpinschers have a distinct appearance that some associate with terriers. They are different from terriers, however, in that they are actually part of the "Group 2, Section 1: Pinschers and Schnauzers" in the FCI classification and so often get along with other dogs and pets. They are active, adventurous, curious, and stubborn, but they are also fun-loving and playful. The breed is confident, lively, affectionate towards family members and is also very protective of them. This loyal little dog enjoys being with its family. It needs consistent, firm training since some can be quite difficult to housebreak. This type of dog easily becomes bored, so training should be varied. The affenpinscher has a terrier-like personality.
Affenpinschers are somewhat territorial when it comes to their toys and food, so they are not recommended for homes with very small children.  This dog is mostly quiet, but it can become very excited if attacked or threatened and shows no fear toward any aggressor.

Lifespan
A small sample (N=21) of affenpinschers in a UK survey had a median lifespan of 11.4 years, which is a typical lifespan for a purebred dog, but a bit lower than most breeds of their size. The most common causes of death were old age (24%), urologic (19%), and "combinations" (14%).The affenpinscher is prone to hip dysplasia. As with many small breeds of dog, they are prone to collapsed trachea and luxating patella. Some are prone to fractures, PDA, open fontanel and respiratory problems in hot weather. Ocular conditions such as cataracts are occasionally reported. An emerging concern is syringomyelia, although the incidence is currently unknown.

Shedding
Affenpinschers often appear on lists of dogs that allegedly do not shed (moult). However, Affenpinscher females are confirmed to be more prone to seasonal flank alopecia, which seems to affect them during the winter. Every hair in the dog coat grows from a hair follicle, which has a three phase cycle, as do most mammals. These cycles are: anagen, growth of normal hair; catagen, growth slows, and hair shaft thins; telegen, hair growth stops, follicle rests, and old hair falls off—is shed. At the end of the telegen phase, the follicle begins the cycle again. The length of time of the growing and shedding cycle varies by breed, age, and by whether the dog is an inside or outside dog.
Frequent grooming reduces the amount of loose fur in the environment.

See also
Dogs portal
List of dog breeds
Companion Dog Group
Companion dog
Toy Group
Griffon Bruxellois

References
External links

Affenpinscher at Curlie
Affenpinscher – Full Breed Profile